# React.memo for reducing unnecessary re-renders

## 📝 Your Notes

Whereas `React.useMemo` is used to memoize the result of expensive function
calls, `React.memo` is used to memoize the entire render function, meaning that
the component will not rerender unless it "needs" to.

The difference between `useMemo` and `useCallback` is that `useMemo` will
memoize the result of an expensive function call, meaning that during re-render,
the function that's wrapped in `useMemo` will check to to see if the deps are
same as before, and if they are, will return the result of the function.
`useCallback` will return the actual memoized callback. Why is this useful ?
Generally during every re-render the function will get a new reference which
means that if you pass the func to a pure component or useEffect, the pure child
component will have its props changed and thus re-render, and the useEffect will
rerun again because the function is referentially different. With useCallback,
because the same function will be returned across different renders IF the deps
are the same, useEffect will not re-rerun.

Why is this important ? Well, IF the component has expensive calculations OR the
component is rendering tons of subcomponents, we'll want to memoize it because
although expensive calculations can be dealt with via `useMemo`, we'd still be
re-rendering tons of components. This could get expensive as re-rendering still
involves making comparisons and determining whether to reconcile/commit or not.

On that note, understand the difference between render/reconcilation/commit.
Understand that committing is the slowest part of the process as it involes
painting and laying out the dom node.

Rendering means that React calls your function to get the React Component.

Reconcilation means comparing the Component with the previously rendered version
of it.

If there's a discrepenacy, React will take those differences and update the DOM
in the commit phase.

To be clear:

The "render" phase: create React elements React.createElement (learn more) The
"reconciliation" phase: compare previous elements with the new ones (learn more)
The "commit" phase: update the DOM (if needed).

## Background

Here's the lifecycle of a React app:

```
→  render → reconciliation → commit
         ↖                   ↙
              state change
```

Let's define a few terms:

- The "render" phase: create React elements React.createElement
- The "reconciliation" phase: compare previous elements with the new ones
- The "commit" phase: update the DOM (if needed).

React exists in its current form (in large part) because updating the DOM is the
slowest part of this process. By separating us from the DOM, React can perform
the most surgically optimal updates to the DOM to speed things up for us
big-time.

A React Component can re-render for any of the following reasons:

1. Its props change
2. Its internal state changes
3. It is consuming context values which have changed
4. Its parent re-renders

React is really fast, however, _sometimes_ it can be useful to give React little
tips about certain parts of the React tree when there's a state update. You can
opt-out of state updates for a part of the React tree by using one of React's
built-in rendering bail-out utilities: `React.PureComponent`, `React.memo`, or
`shouldComponentUpdate`.

I want to emphasize that I've seen many projects make the mistake of using these
utilities as band-aids over more problematic performance problems in their apps.
Please read more about this in my blog post:
[Fix the slow render before you fix the re-render](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/fix-the-slow-render-before-you-fix-the-re-render).

Let's look at an example to learn how this works. You can pull this example up
at
[localhost:3000/isolated/examples/unnecessary-rerenders.js](http://localhost:3000/isolated/examples/unnecessary-rerenders.js)
(and feel free to play with it in `src/examples/unnecessary-rerenders.js`). Pull
this up and profile it with the React DevTools.

```jsx
function CountButton({count, onClick}) {
  return <button onClick={onClick}>{count}</button>
}

function NameInput({name, onNameChange}) {
  return (
    <label>
      Name: <input value={name} onChange={e => onNameChange(e.target.value)} />
    </label>
  )
}

function Example() {
  const [name, setName] = React.useState('')
  const [count, setCount] = React.useState(0)
  const increment = () => setCount(c => c + 1)
  return (
    <div>
      <div>
        <CountButton count={count} onClick={increment} />
      </div>
      <div>
        <NameInput name={name} onNameChange={setName} />
      </div>
      {name ? <div>{`${name}'s favorite number is ${count}`}</div> : null}
    </div>
  )
}
```

Based on how this is implemented, when you click on the counter button, the
`<CountButton />` re-renders (so we can update the `count` value). But the
`<NameInput />` is also re-rendered. If you have
`Record why each component rendered while profiling.` enabled in React DevTools,
then you'll see that under "Why did this render?" it says "The parent component
rendered."

React does this because it has no way of knowing whether the NameInput will need
to return different React elements based on the state change of its parent. In
our case there were no changes necessary, so React didn't bother updating the
DOM. This is what's called an "unnecessary rerender" and if that
render/reconciliation process is expensive, then it can be worthwhile to prevent
it.

Using one of the bail-out APIs, you can instruct React when to re-render.
`React.PureComponent` is for class components and `React.memo` is for function
components and they do basically the same thing by default. They make it so your
component will not re-render simply because its parent re-rendered which could
improve the performance of your app overall.

So here's how we can improve our example:

```jsx
function CountButton({count, onClick}) {
  return <button onClick={onClick}>{count}</button>
}
CountButton = React.memo(CountButton)

function NameInput({name, onNameChange}) {
  return (
    <label>
      Name: <input value={name} onChange={e => onNameChange(e.target.value)} />
    </label>
  )
}
NameInput = React.memo(NameInput)

// etc... no other changes necessary
```

If you try that out, then you'll notice the `<NameInput />` no longer re-renders
when you click on the counter button, saving React the work of having to call
the `NameInput` function and compare the previous react elements with the new
ones.

Again, I want to mention that people can make the mistake of wrapping
_everything_ in `React.memo` which can actually slow down your app in some cases
and in all cases it makes your code more complex. So it's much better to use it
more intentionally and further, there are other things you can do to reduce the
amount of unnecessary re-renders throughout your application (which we'll talk
about more later).

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/03.js)
- [Final](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/final/03.js)

In this exercise, pull up the React DevTools and observe when you click the
"force rerender" button, the `Downshift`, `Menu`, and `ListItem` components are
all re-rendered even though no DOM updates were needed. This is an unnecessary
re-render and a bottleneck in our application (especially if we want to start
showing all of the results rather than just the first 100... I've heard rumors
that the product manager 👨‍💼 wants us to do that). If you enable 6x throttle on
the CPU (under the Performance tab in Chrome DevTools) then you'll notice the
issue is more stark.

Your job is to optimize the `Menu` and `ListItem` components to be memoized via
`React.memo`. Make note of the before/after render times.

### 1. 💯 Use a custom comparator function

[Production deploy](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/final/03.extra-1.js)

You'll notice that as you hover over the elements in the list (or click the
input and press the down and up arrow) the `highlightedIndex` changes. This prop
changes for all the `ListItem` components, but it doesn't mean that they all
need DOM updates. The only ListItems that need a DOM update are 1) the old
highlighted item, and 2) the new highlighted item.

Luckily for us, `React.memo` accepts a second argument which is a custom compare
function that allows us to compare the props and return `true` if rendering the
component again is **unnecessary** and `false` if it is necessary.

See if you can figure out how to use that function to make it so changing the
highlighted index only re-renders the components that need the change.

> NOTE: You can do the same for `selectedItem`, though that one may be tricker
> to test and I tried it and couldn't get it to work 😅 I spent 20 minutes on it
> before giving up! Maybe you can figure it out though. This is why these are
> **OPTIMIZATIONS** and not to be applied in every case. They're hard to get
> right and easy to mess up and create bugs!

### 2. 💯 pass only primitive values

[Production deploy](https://react-performance.netlify.app/isolated/final/03.extra-2.js)

Wouldn't it be even better to not have to provide our custom memoization
comparator function and still get the perf gains? Definitely! So an alternative
approach is to pass the pre-computed values for `isSelected` and `isHighlighted`
to our `ListItem`. That way they are primitive values and we can take advantage
of React's built-in comparison function and remove ours altogether.

The additional benefit to this is when you select an item, only the selected
item needs a re-render.

So for this extra credit, try to accept an `isSelected` and `isHighlighted` prop
to `ListItem` so you don't have to pass the frequently changing values for
`selectedItem` and `highlightedIndex`.

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Performance%20%E2%9A%A1&e=03%3A%20React.memo%20for%20reducing%20unnecessary%20re-renders&em=hamza.hassan92%40gmail.com).
